today I'm clubhouse gas dr. David
Marshall of Children's Healthcare of
Atlanta is here to talk with us about
Little League elbow what it is how it
affects your child how you can prevent
it and the treatments available it's a
great show so stay tuned to Clubhouse
gas
today I'm clubhouse gas we're lucky not
to be joined by a friend of the show dr.
David Marshall dr. Marshall is the
director of sports medicine here at
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta
dr. Marshall thank you so much for
joining my pleasure what a talk today
about study that you did involving elbow
related injuries in little league
pitchers now if when a kid gets an elbow
injury a literally kid that's we all
know that to be tendonitis correct not
always the younger kids typically don't
get tendonitis that the younger kids
will say 14 in below most often have
injures to their growth plates rather
than the tendon and that's our target
audience is the 14 and under and other
physicians we've talked about talked a
lot about the growth plate issue explain
to me what the difference and the age
and those two injuries is well well the
age group the growth plates kids have
growth plates all over their body and
there's one type of a growth plate
called an epiphysis and that growth
plate is found at the ends of all the
long bones and that's a cartilage bar
whose job it is is to lay down layer
after layer after layer of new bone and
that's allows our long bunch to grow in
length there's another growth plate
which is typically involved in sports
injuries called an ape offices an ape
offices is still made of cartilage but
it doesn't contribute to getting longer
the bones don't don't get longer at the
ape offices these a prophecies serve as
an anchor point for muscles and tendons
units very similar to how a cable
attaches to a screw that screws into a
plaster wall if that cable is very
powerful which represents the muscle in
the tendon but that that that plaster is
still cartilage and you keep tugging on
it the screw is going to pull out of the
wall and that's that's what happens with
the growth plate injuries especially the
elbow and youth baseball players so as
they get older the growth plate it just
goes away or no the growth plate goes
through a process called ossification
where the cartilage will turn to bone
it's just like your plaster wall turning
into cement now the anchor point is no
longer the weak spot now the weak spot
becomes a muscle or the tendon so the
older kids the high schooler's the
college kids and of course the pros they
develop tendonitis because their growth
plates are no longer cartilage they've
turned they've turned to bone so the
younger kids are having a growth plate
problem because that's the weakest point
the older kids are having the tendon
problem or the muscle problem because
that's that's correct is that growth
plate plate problem coming from overuse
or in
correct use both overuse injuries
basically is is it's too much too soon
too much throwing too many pitches too
much hitting too much running any tissue
whether it's a muscle attendant a
cartilage growth plate or a bone has has
a threshold of failure you can have the
most perfect technique known but there's
always going to be some threshold where
that tissue fails and then becomes
injured so the kids that have that have
poor technique that might drop their arm
that might open up too soon or they
throw all arm then those kids are going
to have have an injury resulting a lot
sooner than the kid with with better
technique so how do you know that it's
not just from regular soreness and an
arm or it's not a kid you know who's
worked out and he's a little sore but
it's actually a problem how do you yeah
that's that's a tough one and I when I
talk to coaches and I give give lectures
to Little League baseball programs I
tell them it is never normal for a young
athlete to have pain at the elbow the
shoulder or anywhere else I tell them
pain is your body's way of saying
there's something wrong that means they
tissue down they're starting to fail now
there are some kids that have a very low
pain threshold that they may step on a
rock or they may bump their arm and
they're in pain where you've got these
other kids that might have a much higher
level of pain tolerance so their injury
is going to go on longer and longer
before somebody knows about it sometimes
kids won't want to see the doctor they
don't get evaluated because they have
pain but they'll get evaluated when it
starts to affect performance they no
longer have that zip on the fastball
they start to lose control and they
they're they're not able to strike them
anybody out that's when the parent says
hey there's something wrong does your
elbow hurt yeah it's been hurting for it
for three to four weeks well let's go
see somebody and I think it's that type
of scenario that we're trying to avoid
through educating these coaches the
parents and of course the kids and is
that like any other injury if you catch
it early enough it's easier to treat
usually it is now a fracture well those
those those unavoidable single event
broken bone ruptured tendon concussions
you can't prevent those and those those
kind of fall out of the context of
overuse or too much too soon overuse
injuries are preventable so how do you
treat the growth plate injury in an arm
well when a kid starts complaining of
elbow pain and they see us it hurts over
here by the inner part of my elbow when
I throw to me if they're under 14 that's
a growth plate injury to a proven
otherwise and I think any any young
athlete with elbow pain needs to be
evaluated and the first thing you do is
a good physical exam if they
the growth plate than definitely you
x-rated man he can you can see specific
changes on their x-ray and in the growth
plate and is that a treatable condition
with therapy and ice recited something
that you have to operate I mean how does
how do you get better from a work point
in hopefully you don't have to operate
it all depends on how far that growth
plate separates if that growth plate
pulls apart feathers there's different
parameters but I use nine millimeters
which isn't very far if it separates
nine millimeters from the main bone then
that's an indication for a surgical
referral where the surgeons will have to
put a pin in it to get that growth plate
to get back to the mother bone if it's
less than that then we typically treat
them with with rest and sometimes
casting a sling may help or just say you
can't throw for creator' four to six
weeks while the glue dries while that
growth leg heals when a kid originally
injured his growth plate from let's just
say overuse it doesn't automatically
move the 9 millimeters does it get
bigger over time it certainly can most
of the time the growth plate injuries
are just irritations of that growth
plate that they haven't separated if it
separates we call that an avulsion if
it's just irritated it means the x-rays
are normal but they still have paint
over that attachment site we call that a
pas fascitis or an inflammation of that
of that growth plate so if you catch it
early enough you can maybe keep it from
getting to that point where yeah yes
it's growth grade one injuries can
become grade twos grade twos can become
grade 3s and grade three can become
great fours if not taken care of so
first and foremost good form don't throw
too much try to stay away from overuse
and if you do have an injury get it to a
doctor as quick as possible let somebody
know right away if your if your elbow or
your shoulder starts hurting all right
dr. Marshall thank you so much we really
appreciate it my pleasure that's gonna
do it for us today we really appreciate
you joining us and we'll see you right
back here tomorrow for another great
edition of clubhouse gas